{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto


{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Course title: Generalized and linear mixed models for biologists\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Learning outcomes (knowledge, skills, social competence and attitude):\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The student understands the theoretical framework for statistical methods applied to the biological sciences, specifically generalized linear models for count and binomial data and mixed models for clustered data.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Skills\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The student can:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab effectively create exploratory, diagnostic, and expository graphs from data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab choose and execute an appropriate statistical analysis for a given set of data and scientific questions\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab execute, trouble-shoot, and interpret the results of linear and generalized linear mixed models.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Social competence and attitude\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 The student can:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab communicate the scientific questions to be asked, justify and explain the connection to the results of a statistical analysis\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab appreciate the importance of rigorous and ethical approaches to statistical analysis, avoiding data snooping\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Prerequisites:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Theoretical knowledge and practical skills in applying statistical methods at the basic level:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab understanding basic concepts (types of measurement scales, probability, basic types of distributions, central limit theorem, measures of central tendency and dispersion, variance, standard deviation, standard error, confidence interval, parameter, estimator, statistical test, statistical null and alternative hypotheses, type I and type II errors, significance level);\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab understanding and practical ability to perform basic statistical analyses (e.g. Student's t-test)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab understanding of basic linear models and their implementation in R: simple analysis of regression and correlation, simple analysis of variance, multiple regression and ANCOVA.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Basic proficiency in the R programming language.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Full description (=content of the course):\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab exploratory graphics using {\f1 ggplot} (Wickham, 2009,Cleveland (1993))\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab intro to quantitative display: graphical hierarchies\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab ggplot basics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab intermediate ggplot: smooths and facets\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab mixed/hierarchical/multilevel models: introduction (Gelman & Hill, 2006,Zuur et al. (2009))\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab conceptual basis, frequentist and Bayesian\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab definition of random effects\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab shrinkage and pooling\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab experimental designs: nesting and crossing\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab linear mixed models\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab frequentist estimation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab model diagnostics and checking\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab inference\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab generalized linear mixed models\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab frequentist estimation\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab model diagnostics and checking\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab inference\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab introduction to Bayesian statistics\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab basic Bayes\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab modern computational Bayes: MCMC\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Bayesian estimation/diagnostics/inference for (G)LMMs\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Additional topics (as time/interest allows)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab time-series and spatial models\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab zero-inflated models\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab GLMs: alternative families and links\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Bibliography\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Cleveland, W. (1993). {\i Visualizing Data}. Summit, NJ: Hobart Press.\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Gelman, A., & Hill, J. (2006). {\i Data analysis using regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical models}. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/arm/"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
http://www.stat.columbia.edu/~gelman/arm/
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Wickham, H. (2009). {\i Ggplot2: Elegant graphics for data analysis}. Springer New York. Retrieved from {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://had.co.nz/ggplot2/book"}}{\fldrslt{\ul
http://had.co.nz/ggplot2/book
}}}
\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Zuur, A. F., Ieno, E. N., Walker, N. J., Saveliev, A. A., & Smith, G. M. (2009). {\i Mixed effects models and extensions in ecology with R}. Springer.\par}
}
